Title: AOI-SSL: Self-Supervised Framework for Efficient Segmentation of Wire-bonded Semiconductors In Optical Inspection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12430v1

Published Time: Wed, 13 May 2026 01:54:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# AOI-SSL: Self-Supervised Framework for Efficient Segmentation of Wire-bonded Semiconductors In Optical Inspection 

## Joaqu´ ın Figueira 1 Rob van Gastel 2 Giacomo D’Amicantonio 1 Zhuoran Liu 3

## Ioan Gabriel Bucur 3 Faysal Boughorbel 2 Egor Bondarev 11AIMS Lab, Eindhoven University of Technology 2CoC, ASMPT 3iCIS, Radboud University 

{j.figueira, g.d.amicantonio, e.bondarev }@tue.nl 

{rob.van.gastel, faysal.boughorbel }@asmpt.com {zhuoran.liu, gabriel.bucur }@ru.nl 

## Abstract 

Segmentation models in automated optical inspection of wire-bonded semiconductors are typically device-specific and must be re-trained when new devices or distribution shifts appear. We introduce AOI-SSL, a training-efficient framework for semantic segmentation of wire-bonded semi-conductors by combining small-domain self-supervised pre-training of vision transformers with in-context inference that minimizes the need of labeled examples. We pre-train SOTA self-supervised algorithms in a small industrial inspection dataset and find that Masked Autoencoders are the most effective in this small-data setting, improving downstream segmentation while reducing the labeled fine-tuning effort. We further introduce in-context, patch-level retrieval meth-ods that predict masks directly from dense encoder embed-dings with negligible additional training. We show that, in this setting, simple similarity-based retrieval performs on par with more complex attention-based aggregation used currently in the literature. Furthermore, our experiments demonstrate that self-supervised pre-training significantly improves segmentation quality compared to training from scratch and to ImageNet pre-trained backbones under a fixed fine-tuning computational budget. Finally, the results reveal that retrieval based segmentation outperforms fine-tuning when targeting single device images, allowing for near-instant adaptation to difficult samples. Code is avail-able at https://github.com/jacomof/aoi-ssl .

## 1. Introduction 

Automated optical inspection (AOI) is a critical quality con-trol component in semiconductor manufacturing, where high-resolution images are used to detect defects and structural anomalies during and after packaging. In the context of wire-bonded devices, semantic segmentation of components such as wires, bonds, wedges, and encapsulation material is Retrieval (Ours) U-Net++ Ground Truth 

Figure 1. Segmentation Performance on Complex Wire-bond Geometry . Different classes are highlighted in different colors over monochrome images of representative samples. Our retrieval method shows superior performance in two difficult devices where the baseline ResNet18 + UNet++ model fails to segment wedge bonds entirely. 

often a prerequisite for downstream inspection and decision-making. Despite recent progress in deep learning-based inspection systems, most AOI pipelines still rely on models and preprocessing routines that are tightly coupled to spe-cific device designs and acquisition conditions [ 6, 8, 36 , 39 ]. As a consequence, introducing a new device or encountering a significant covariate shift typically requires collecting new labeled data and re-training new segmentation models, which is costly and time-consuming in production environments. Recent advances in self-supervised learning (SSL) have demonstrated that strong visual representations can be learned without manual annotation by pre-training on large-scale image collections [ 10 , 15 , 19 , 34 ]. Methods based on self-distillation and Masked Image Modeling (MIM), such as DINOv2 [ 31 ], Masked Autoencoders (MAE) [ 20 ], and iBOT [ 40 ], have shown impressive transfer performance in a variety of downstream tasks. However, most existing work assumes access to very large and diverse pre-training 

> arXiv:2605.12430v1 [cs.CV] 12 May 2026

datasets [ 16 ], or the existence of pre-trained models adequate in their image modality (usually RGB images). In contrast, AOI systems in the semiconductor industry typically operate in highly specialized visual domains, where only a limited amount of labeled and unlabeled data is available [ 24 ], and where imaging data does not follow the standard RGB struc-ture (e.g., X-Ray imaging [ 8 ]). In the context of industrial optical inspection, monochrome cameras are widely used because they provide superior sensitivity, resolution, and processing speed [ 35 ], adding an additional differentiator with the most common computer vision algorithms. To tackle these challenges, we introduce AOI-SSL, a comprehensive framework tailored for domain-specific au-tomated optical inspection. Our approach integrates self-supervised pre-training and fine-tuning strategies designed for low-data regimes, utilizing efficient Vision Transformer (ViT) [ 13 ] architectures and in-context test-time adaptation. Specifically, we investigate whether domain-specific SSL can yield representations that rival or surpass those of es-tablished encoders pre-trained on massive, generic datasets, such as ImageNet [ 12 ]. This is evaluated in the context of semantic segmentation for wire-bonded semiconductor de-vices using a non-standard, monochrome 2-channel format. In this configuration, each channel captures a grayscale view of the device under a distinct light source, a setup optimized for optical calibration and depth estimation in the broader inspection pipeline. Fig. 1 illustrates these dual-light views along with their corresponding semantic segmentation masks for two representative devices. Our focus is on improving the downstream performance of the encoders for semantic segmentation and minimizing the amount of costly human-labeled data. We show that, in this setting, MAE pre-training is particularly effective, leading to faster convergence and higher segmentation per-formance compared to alternative pre-training strategies. Beyond parametric fine-tuning, retrieval-based segmen-tation strategies, which leverage the encoder representation space directly at inference time, are explored for fast test-time adaptation. Inspired by recent work on retrieval-based scene understanding [ 2 , 32 ], we propose patch-level retrieval methods that operate on dense token embeddings and pro-duce segmentation masks by aggregating labels from nearest neighbors in an embedding key-value memory bank. Un-like conventional encoder–decoder architectures, these ap-proaches require little to no additional training on labeled data and can be adapted to new devices with only a relatively small number of labeled images by updating the retrieval memory bank. Finally, we analyze architectural inductive bias in this domain and show that transformer variants that incorporate convolutional elements, such as FasterViT [ 17 ], yield signif-icant gains for fine-grained structures over traditional vision transformers. Our contributions can be summarized as fol-lows: 1. Small-data AOI pre-training protocol: We develop an SSL pre-training protocol tailored to small AOI datasets and tiny models under adverse conditions (two-channel input, low variance, black borders, fine structures, and edge compute), and show that MAE outperforms DINO and iBOT in this regime. 2. Efficiency gain: We demonstrate that MAE pre-training substantially accelerates fine-tuning and yields superior segmentation quality (up to ∼50.7% relative improve-ment) under a fixed ∼8 hour training budget. 3. Practical retrieval-based segmentation: We intro-duce image/patch retrieval strategies for AOI achieving training-free, near instant test-time adaptation, and show that patch-level cosine similarity aggregation is often sufficient, while attention-based aggregation is not uni-versally superior for multi-label dense retrieval. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Self-Supervised Learning for Vision 

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has become a dominant ap-proach for learning transferable visual representations with-out manual annotation. Two families are especially relevant to this work: (i) teacher–student self-distillation methods, exemplified by DINO [ 7], and (ii) masked image model-ing (MIM), exemplified by MAE [ 20 ]. Hybrid approaches, such as iBOT, combine patch-level prediction with online tokenization, bridging masked prediction and distillation-style training signals [ 40 ]. More recently, large-scale train-ing has produced strong general-purpose encoders, such as DINOv2 [ 31 ] and DINOv3 [ 34 ], often pre-trained on ex-tremely large and diverse data. Most SSL progress is demonstrated on generic natural-image benchmarks, whereas industrial domains are typically narrow and data-constrained [ 4 ]. In this paper, we focus on 

domain-specific SSL, where pre-training is performed on a comparatively small AOI dataset. We evaluate the effect of different SSL strategies (MAE/DINO/iBOT) under this regime. Our emphasis is not on scaling data and model size, but on demonstrating that careful SSL pre-training can be effective and practical for AOI semantic segmentation in small-data settings, and also reduce the labeled fine-tuning budget required to reach acceptable segmentation quality. 

2.2. Deep Learning for Industrial Inspection and AOI 

Automated visual inspection in semiconductor manufactur-ing has been widely studied and surveyed [ 22 ], and mod-ern AOI pipelines increasingly incorporate deep learning. Representative approaches include supervised representation learning for PCB defect classification [ 11 , 28 ], instance-level detection/segmentation pipelines based on Mask R-CNN for Training Phase 

> Inference Phase
> …
> …
> …
> …
> …
> De -
> Patchify
> Memory Bank
> Retrieval
> …
> …
> …
> …
> …
> …
> …
> ViT
> Encoder
> SSL
> Pre -training
> ViT
> Encoder
> Query image
> Masks
> Images
> Label Aggregation
> …
> …
> …
> Patchify

Figure 2. Overview of the Retrieval Segmentation Pipeline . The process follows three stages: (i) a pre-training stage (highlighted in light pink) where a ViT encoder is trained with unlabeled images, (ii) a training phase (light blue region), where training images are encoded using the ViT and stored in the key collection ( K) in combination with their labels stored in the value collection ( V ), and (iii) an inference phase (light green region) where a query image is encoded into a patch collection Q, k nearest patches are retrieved, labels are aggregated and the output mask is re-assembled. The reference device image displayed was adapted from [30] under CC BY-SA 4.0. 

solder joint recognition [ 36 ], and cascaded convolutional ar-chitectures for SMT solder joint inspection [ 6]. Vision trans-formers [ 13 ] have also been explored for industrial visual inspection tasks, indicating that transformer-based models can be effective in industrial inspection [23, 26]. For wire-bonded semiconductor inspection specifically, Zhang et al . [ 39 ] recently proposed an integrated circuit bonding distance prediction pipeline that leverages modern segmentation architectures as part of a hierarchical inspec-tion pipeline, achieving strong performance in their target setting. However, this and many AOI works are typically evaluated under narrow device and acquisition conditions and rely on task- and device-specific engineering [ 22 ], which can limit straightforward reuse when devices or imaging con-ditions change. In contrast, we focus on reducing repeated re-training by studying (i) domain-specific self-supervised pre-training in small-data AOI regimes to improve data ef-ficiency, and (ii) retrieval-based, patch-level segmentation that can adapt to new devices by updating a labeled memory rather than re-training a full decoder. 

2.3. Retrieval-Based and In-Context Scene Under-standing 

Retrieval-based approaches offer a non-parametric or parameter-efficient alternative to standard decoders by trans-ferring labels from similar examples in a learned embedding space. A recent formulation for in-context dense prediction is Retrieval-based Scene Understanding (RSU), which first constructs a patch-level memory of embeddings and labels. Then, RSU predicts new masks by aggregating the labels of the retrieved neighbors, via an attention-like label mixing mechanism [ 2 , 32 ]. This connects naturally to the broader notion of in-context learning [ 5 ], where task behavior is conditioned by a context (here, retrieved labeled examples) rather than by gradient-based adaptation. Despite the strong match between retrieval-based adapta-tion and AOI needs, retrieval-based patch-level segmentation has seen virtually no adoption in industrial AOI settings. Our work adapts these ideas to semantic segmentation of wire-bonded devices and explicitly analyzes design choices that matter in multi-label dense prediction. 

2.4. Architectural Inductive Bias in Vision Trans-formers 

Vision transformers can be highly effective, but their per-formance for dense prediction depends strongly on ar-chitectural inductive biases and multi-scale feature han-dling. Transformer-based segmentation designs, such as SegFormer [ 38 ], emphasize computational efficiency and hierarchical feature construction. Similarly, Swin [ 27 ] and FasterViT [ 17 ] introduce hierarchical attention with down-sampling stages to improve the throughput–accuracy trade-off while preserving multi-scale structure. In this work, we leverage such architectures as practical AOI backbones and show that inductive bias (e.g., convolutional stages and down-sampling) remains important even after SSL pre-training, particularly for thin and elongated structures, such as wires. 

## 3. Method 

We address AOI multi-label semantic segmentation for wire-bonded semiconductors under practical constraints: scarce labeled data, low intra-domain variance, two-channel imag-ing, fine-grained structures (e.g., thin wires), large empty bor-ders, and edge-device compute budgets. Our approach has three components: (i) domain-specific self-supervised pre-training, (ii) time-budgeted fine-tuning with a lightweight decoder, and (iii) retrieval-based, in-context segmentation that avoids re-training by transferring labels from a labeled memory as detailed in Fig. 2. Moreover, since capturing the fine-grained geometry of the components is of the up-most importance for AOI, we use the mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) metric as our main evaluation tool. 

3.1. Datasets 

Two proprietary datasets of two-channel AOI images of wire-bonded semiconductor devices are used: an unlabeled dataset for self-supervised pre-training and a labeled dataset for su-pervised fine-tuning and retrieval evaluation. Each channel is a grayscale image captured under a different illumina-tion source, an image set-up relevant for optical calibration and depth estimation in later stages of the inspection pro-cess. Furthermore, all images were acquired using the same proprietary optical inspection system, featuring various wire-bonded device models centered on a conveyor belt. 

Pre-train dataset (unlabeled). The pre-train dataset spans multiple device layouts, bonding configurations, wire geometries (count, thickness, curvature), and packaging ma-terial distributions. The resolutions of the images vary sub-stantially (from ∼800 ×800 up to ∼8120 ×8120 pixels), but the vast majority are within the range of 1024 ×1024 and 2048 ×2048 pixels. Additionally, most images contain large black borders due to device framing and size. The dataset contains 7,000+ unlabeled images collected from 50+ distinct devices. Its device diversity and wide range of resolutions make it suitable for learning domain-specific representations via self-supervised objectives. This setup is intended to model the realistic scenario where an encoder is pre-trained centrally (e.g., in a data center) and distributed with the AOI system to enable fast downstream adaptation. 

Fine-tune dataset (labeled). The fine-tune dataset con-tains 625 labeled images from devices that are also present during pre-training, but under conditions that can induce performance degradation (e.g., covariate shifts from cap-ture and process variation). Image resolutions are within the same range as in the pre-train dataset. The labels are 

multi-label at the pixel level: a pixel may belong to multi-ple classes, reflecting physically plausible overlaps (e.g., a wire passing over another component). The dataset provides annotations for four foreground classes: wire , ball , wedge ,and epoxy . As expected in a semantic segmentation task, the class distribution is strongly imbalanced even without an ex-plicit background class. Figure 3 shows the class frequency distribution. 

Pre-processing. For training and evaluation, 512 × 512 

center crops are extracted to standardize input size. Based wire ball wedge epoxy 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Frequency
> 0.753
> 0.195
> 0.002
> 0.050
> Train
> Test
> Figure 3. Pixel-wise frequency of the four wire-bond classes in our fine-tune dataset (background not considered). The distribution remains consistent across training (blue) and test (orange) splits, ensuring the model is tested on a representative sample. There is a large class imbalance, notable in the wedge class which consists of less than 1% of the labeled pixels.

on the pre-train dataset statistics, Z-score standardization is also applied in both datasets. 

3.2. Encoders 

Two lightweight vision transformers designed to optimize throughput are utilized: ViT-Tiny, a custom ViT implemen-tation with 6 transformer blocks, a 384-dimensional embed-ding, and 6 attention heads; and FasterViT-0 [ 17 ], the most lightweight version of this architecture. ViTs generally func-tion by splitting input images into patches, mapping them to a token space, and applying attention, thereby producing patch embeddings. ViT-Tiny additionally includes image level embeddings with a special class token: [CLS]. 

3.3. Domain-Specific Self-Supervised Pre-training 

We adapt three SSL paradigms to our pre-training dataset: MAE, DINO, and iBOT. In MAE, the SSL objective is to learn meaningful representations via reconstruction. It is done by masking part of the input via the elimination of random patch tokens, which are then reconstructed in pixel space using a light-weight transformer-based decoder head. Learning is driven by the mean squared error (MSE) loss between the unmasked input image and the reconstructed image. We also leverage view-invariant self-distillation paradigms via DINO and iBOT. These frameworks employ a student-teacher architecture, in which the teacher network is parameterized as an exponential moving average (EMA) of the student’s weights. To mitigate representation collapse, encoders are coupled with a projection head g that maps [CLS] embeddings to a K-dimensional probability space, where semantically similar images are clustered together. Specifically, for an input image I, a set of augmented views Vs(I) and Vt(I) is generated for the teacher and student, respectively. The student is then trained to match its projected output distribution ( P (i) 

> s

) with that of the teacher ( P (i) 

> t

) through a temperature-scaled softmax along all pairs of augmented views between As(I) and At(I),and along all output dimensions. A running mean c is also subtracted from the teacher’s latent projections to prevent the model from converging to a trivial uniform solution (i.e, centering [ 7]). The resulting self-distillation objective 

LDINO is defined in Eq. (3). 

P (i) 

> s

(x) = exp( gs(x)(i)/τ s)

PKj=1 exp( gs(x)(j)/τ s) , (1) 

P (i) 

> t

(x) = exp(( gt(x)(i) − c)/τ t)

PKj=1 exp(( gt(x)(j) − c)/τ t) , (2) 

LDINO (I) = X

> x∈At(I)

X

> x′∈As(I)
> K

X

> i=1

−P (i) 

> t

(x) log P (i) 

> s

(x′)

(3) While DINO focuses on aligning global [CLS] tokens, iBOT extends this framework by incorporating a patch-level masked image modeling (MIM) objective, where the stu-dent is tasked with reconstructing the masked patch-level embeddings using the teacher as a reference. 

Adaptations. For MAE, a modified pre-training strategy motivated by iBOT and DINO is used, where learnable masked tokens are included in both the encoder and de-coder inputs. This is a necessary adaptation to allow the use of the technique in FasterViT, which is not capable of processing an arbitrary number of tokens per-image as re-quired in the original MAE masking strategy [ 20 ]. DINO and iBOT are adapted through hyperparameter tuning and additional data augmentations to ensure convergence on a small AOI-specific dataset. 

3.4. Semantic Segmentation Fine-tuning 

SSL-pre-trained encoders are fine-tuned with a lightweight segmentation head to meet industrial inference time require-ments. We attach an UPerNet [ 37 ] decoder head, which combines multi-scale features with a pyramid pooling mod-ule and a feature pyramid network. For ViT-Tiny, the outputs of the last four transformer blocks are passed through the decoder; for FasterViT-0, its four hierarchical feature maps are used. 

3.5. Retrieval-Based In-Context Segmentation 

To avoid repeated re-training under device changes or dis-tribution shifts, we propose retrieval-based segmentation. Given a labeled memory bank of reference images, we en-code them into an embedding space and transfer labels from nearest neighbors. Both image-level and patch-level retrieval (summarized in Fig. 2) are studied. Since FasterViT yields low-resolution patches within its semantically dense layers, patch-level retrieval is restricted to the ViT-Tiny architecture. 

Key-value Memory Bank Construction Let an input crop be patchified into L tokens, and let the encoder output patch embeddings be Q ∈ RL×d.For a reference gallery of N labeled images and embed-ding dimension d, a patch memory is built by a collection of paired normalized embedding keys ( kj ) and raw patch multi-label value masks ( Vj ): 

M =

n

(kj , V j ) | kj ∈ Rd, V j ∈ RP 2×C oMj=1 

, (4) where M = PNn=1 Ln is the number of patches stored, 

P 2 is the patch resolution, and C is the number of classes. To maximize IoU, the memory stores the full mask label 

Vj for patch embedding kj (instead of average labels as in RSU [ 2]), an optimization allowed by our relatively small memory bank sizes. 

Patch Retrieval and Label Aggregation For a query im-age Q, patch embeddings ( qi) are computed and normalized, and the top-k neighbors per patch N (i) are retrieved using cosine similarity with the keys of M. Moreover, the similar-ity score si,j is stored for each neighbor j ∈ N (i). We then consider the following aggregation mechanisms. 

Similarity-based label combination (ours). Neighbor labels are directly weighted by normalized similarity ( wsim  

> i,j

): 

wsim  

> i,j

= si,j 

P 

> m∈N (i)

si,m 

, ˆyi = X 

> j∈N (i)

wsim  

> i,j

Vj . (5) 

Attention-based label combination (RSU-style). Fol-lowing an RSU-style aggregation [ 2 ], attention weights (wattn  

> i,j

) are computed with temperature β and employed to average neighbor labels: 

wattn  

> i,j

= softmax j∈N (i)

 si,j 

β



, ˆyi = X 

> j∈N (i)

wattn  

> i,j

Vj .

(6) The patch predictions {ˆyi}Li=1 are reshaped back to im-age resolution, and class-specific thresholds are applied to produce the final multi-label mask. 

Image-level Retrieval Image-level retrieval functions as a special case of the patch-level algorithm, using global embeddings and full segmentation masks. For a reference gallery of N images with resolution H × W and dimension 

d, we redefine the query embedding as a single vector q ∈

Rd, and the memory M defined below, while maintaining the other components unchanged and using only similarity-based label combination: 

M =

n

(kj , V j ) | kj ∈ Rd, V j ∈ R(H×W )×C oNj=1 

. (7) 4. Experiments and Results 

In this section, we outline our experimental setup and im-plementation details. Our primary results are then presented alongside the ablation experiments to demonstrate the robust-ness of our pre-training, fine-tuning and retrieval strategies. 

4.1. Experimental Setup 

Data Integrity and Splits. To ensure a rigorous evalua-tion and avoid direct leakage, a strict separation between all dataset phases is maintained. Although the labeled and unla-beled SSL datasets overlap in terms of device models, to test proper generalization capacity to unseen images, we ensure that there are no identical overlapping images between the two datasets. The supervised fine-tuning dataset has a 70/30 train-test split, with an additional set of ∼100 labeled images for validation. In single-device retrieval experiments, the memory consists of 42 curated images, evaluated on a dis-joint set of 24 images from the same device family to ensure that structural priors are not trivialized by image repetition. 

Baseline Selection and Tuning. We select ResNet18 [ 18 ], U-Net++ [41 ] and DeepLabV3+ [9]as primary convolutional baselines. These architectures approximate industry standards for high-precision defect detection and high-throughput industrial segmentation, respectively. To ensure a fair comparison, ImageNet-pretrained baselines are trained with an inverted layer-wise learning rate decay; higher learning rates are set in earlier encoder layers to prioritize adaptation of structural filters to the monochrome 2-channel images. 

Training Protocol. All models are trained under a fixed 8-hour computational budget on an NVIDIA RTX 2080 GPU to simulate industrial deployment constraints and hardware conditions. An AdamW optimizer with a weight decay of 0.05 and a cosine learning rate scheduler are utilized. 

4.2. Pre-training 

Implementation Details. For all self-supervised paradigms, a suite of domain-specific data augmentations to reflect AOI-inherent capturing conditions is employed: random verti-cal/horizontal flips, 90 ◦ rotations, Gaussian blur ( σ ≤ 0.5), contrast jitter, and Gaussian noise ( σ2 ∈ [0 .05 , 12 .75] ). Training follows a cosine annealing schedule with linear warm up of 100 epochs, adhering to optimization protocols in [ 7 , 20 , 40 ]. We observe that omitting this specific aug-mentation policy leads to premature representation collapse across all frameworks. 

MAE Configuration. Empirical evaluation indicates that MAE consistently outperforms semantic-centric strategies (DINO, iBOT) in our corpus. We hypothesize that MAE’s pixel-level reconstruction is better suited for dense down-stream tasks in domains with low semantic diversity, where cluster-based distillation fails to capture fine-grained geo-metric features. Therefore, we highlight MAE results and            

> Cosine LLRD mIoU Annealing
> ✓✓53.7
> ✓✗33.7
> ✗✓19.6
> ✗✗22.4
> Table 1. Effect of cosine annealing and layer-wise learning-rate decay (LLRD) on segmentation metrics (best result in bold ).

include additional implementation details and evaluations in the supplementary material (Sec. A and Sec. E, respectively). Our MAE adaptation utilizes a decoder consisting of two transformer blocks and a patch-wise regression head, opti-mized via pixel-wise MSE loss between original and recon-structed masked patches. With a masking ratio of 0.7, the model effectively captures the underlying data distribution for specialized AOI inspection. Pre-training is performed for a total of 3000 epochs with a batch size of 100 and a base learning rate of 1.5 × 10 −4 on an NVIDIA A100 GPU. 

4.3. Fine-tuning Optimization, Training Schedule and Loss Function 

AOI fine-tuning should converge quickly and stably. To this end, a combination of (i) cosine annealing learning rate decay and (ii) layer-wise learning rate decay (LLRD) is used following the fine-tuning protocols established by DINO [ 7 ]. Table 1, which displays the performance in the validation set, shows that these choices are crucial, enabling substantial improvements in mIoU. Detailed hyperparameter values can be found in the supplementary material (Sec. B). 

Loss function. Because the target of our work is on multi-label classification with overlap, the loss is computed indi-vidually for each class and averaged to obtain a single scalar loss value. We experimented with different region-based losses, such as soft DICE [ 29 ] and Jaccard [ 33 ], to address the severe class imbalance in our dataset. However, after evaluating several models on the labeled validation set, we determined that the best option for multi-label segmentation, in our use case, is simple class-wise BCE. Detailed results for each loss can be found in Sec. C of the supplementary material. 

4.4. Retrieval Optimization 

Since our evaluation metric, mIoU, relies on binary masks, a thresholding strategy is defined to convert model outputs into per-class labels. For fine-tuned models (FasterViT, ViT and convolutional baselines), a fixed threshold of 0.5 is applied. This standardizes the evaluation and avoids optimization bias across the diverse set of architectures tested. In contrast, retrieval-based techniques produce similarity-driven scores rather than normalized probability distribu-tions. Consequently, performance is highly sensitive to the choice of threshold for each class. Leveraging the negligible training overhead of retrieval, a grid search is performed to obtain the optimal thresholds and number of neighbors ( k)with 5-fold cross-validation on the supervised training split. The search is performed independently for each class using mIoU as the selection criterion. To computationally optimize patch retrieval, the Faiss library [ 14 ] is employed to store and perform patch embed-ding queries on GPU, achieving near-logarithmic inference time in terms of memory bank size. In terms of memory foot-print, storing embeddings and labels for the entire fine-tuning training dataset requires ∼ 2GB of GPU RAM. 

4.5. Quantitative Analysis 

Comparison to Baseline Supervised Encoders. In Ta-ble 2, we compare our best MAE-pretrained configurations against ImageNet-supervised baselines. Our FasterViT-0 + UPerNet achieves the best performance with 60.3% mIoU, outperforming the baseline ResNet18 + U-Net++ by nearly 8 percentage points. Although fine-tuned models excel in high-support classes, our training-free patch retrieval re-mains highly competitive (48.1% mIoU) while offering sig-nificantly higher throughput (266.7 crops/s). This trend is also visible in the results for the additional baseline models available in Sec. E of the supplementary material. 

Generalization to Foundation Models. To assess the versatility of our retrieval framework, we evaluated its perfor-mance with a frozen ViT-Small DINOv2 encoder pre-trained on the 142M-image LVD142M dataset (RGB images) [ 31 ]. To adapt it to two channel input, an artificial channel is added by computing the average of the first two channels. The re-sults demonstrate that the retrieval technique successfully adapts to general-purpose backbones, achieving mIoU scores comparable to the supervised DeepLab baselines. However, this comparison also underscores the significant “double benefit” of our proposed pipeline: our custom MAE pre-training provides superior mIoU performance while using less than 1% of the pre-training data and less than half of the parameters ( ∼ 10M vs. ∼ 22M). Furthermore, our cus-tom backbone achieves ∼3× higher throughput due to its more efficient 16 × 16 patch size (DINOv2 uses 14 × 14 

patches) and smaller size. This suggests that while retrieval is backbone-agnostic, it reaches its full potential in industrial AOI when paired with domain-specific self-supervision. 

The Role of Architectural Inductive Bias. A crit-ical finding in our method comparison is the supe-rior performance of the hybrid FasterViT-0 architecture. While the standard ViT-Tiny achieves a respectable 53.5% mIoU, FasterViT-0 reaches 60.3%, outperforming its pure-transformer counterpart. As evidenced by the class scores in Tab. 2, this gain is particularly pronounced in the Wire 

class. We attribute this improvement to the integration of techniques such as hierarchical downsampling and overlap-ping tokenization, which prevent finer details from falling in-between patches. 

Table 2. Method Comparison. Comparison of our fine-tuned and retrieval methods against ImageNet-supervised baselines. AOI-MAE refers to our AOI-specific MAE training. The relative per-formance gain from pre-training is displayed between parentheses. Best results are highlighted in bold , while second best are under-lined. Throughput is measured on an NVIDIA RTX 2080 GPU.                                           

> Model Crops/s mIoU Epoxy Wire Wedge Ball
> Supervised Baselines
> ResNet18 + DeepLab 87.3 43.5 66.7 50.3 10.3 46.7 ResNet18 + U-Net++ 86.9 52.4 75.4 59.1 9.2 65.8
> Ours (Frozen DINOv2)
> ViT-Small Patch Retrieval 90.9 47.8 43.4 48.7 45.8 53.4
> Ours (AOI-MAE Pre-trained)
> ViT-Tiny + Patch Retrieval 266.7 48.1 38.4 47.8 44.4 61.8 ViT-Tiny + UPerNet 218.1 53.5 (+50.7%) 73.7 43.0 26.5 70.7 FasterViT-0 + UPerNet 163.3 60.3 (+40.9%) 79.3 66.7 19.3 75.8

Table 3. Single-Device Retrieval Performance. Results of apply-ing patch retrieval with an MAE-pre-trained encoder on a single device layout (best results in bold ). We adopt the same hyperpa-rameters used in the main method comparison.                

> Strategy mIoU Epoxy Wire Wedge Ball
> Patch Retrieval 71.5 68.0 65.6 78.7 73.5
> ResNet18 + U-Net++ (Fine-tuned) 47.5 43.3 72.1 3.4 71.1

Single-Device Retrieval. As shown in Tab. 3, when the memory is curated to a uniform device layout, our training-free patch retrieval method reaches 71.5% mIoU. This mas-sively outperforms the fully fine-tuned ResNet18 + U-Net++ baseline (47.5%), which struggles heavily in segmenting the wedge class, highlighting retrieval’s potential for near-instant model adaptation in production environments. 

4.6. Qualitative Analysis and Discussion 

The “Wedge” Specialist. Accurate identification of bonding points is critical in our domain, as they represent a primary failure mode in wire-bonded devices [ 1 ]. As established previously in Fig. 1, our retrieval strategy emerges as a key positive differentiator for the Wedge bond class, where stan-dard convolutional decoders typically struggle. This ad-vantage is also present to a lesser degree in our fine-tuned ViTs (see Fig. 4). In contrast, the convolutional baselines tend to “over-smooth” these fine-grained structures, which, in combinations with the large class imbalance, results in poor IoU (3.4%–9.2%) due to low recall. By matching sim-ilar patches directly, and by pre-conditioning the encoder to the fine-grained structures, our methods achieve 78.7% IoU on wedge bonds. This suggests that for restricted model scales, in-context retrieval is more effective in preserving fine-grained details than traditional decoder-based adapta-tion. 

ViT’s resolution problem. As visible in Fig. 4, a no-table finding of our experiments is that standard ViTs often produce “boxy”, low-resolution segmentation masks due to their non-overlapping patch boundaries, a problem less prevalent in FasterViT due to its hierarchical attention and ViT (MAE) FasterViT (MAE) U-Net++    

> Wire Ball Wedge Epoxy

Figure 4. Visual Comparison of Fine-tuned Models. Our MAE-pre-trained, fine-tuned ViT + UPerNet models (left, center) are compared with the ResNet18 + U-Net++ baseline (right). The transformer-based models showcase superior recall for the wedge and epoxy classes. Table 4. Retrieval Strategy Ablations. Comparison of different retrieval strategies using 5-fold cross-validation on the fine-tune training split. The best performance of each SSL algorithm is displayed in bold .                        

> Pre-training Level Combination mIoU MAE Image Similarity 26.9
> Patch Similarity 45.7
> Patch Attention 44.7 DINO Image Similarity 26.6
> Patch Similarity 39.3
> Patch Attention 38.3 iBOT Image Similarity 29.8 Patch Similarity 33.2
> Patch Attention 40.1

multi-scale features. We expand on other failure modes of our framework in Sec. D of the supplementary material. 

4.7. Ablations 

Retrieval Strategies and Encoders We evaluate the retrieval-based framework across three dimensions: (i) spa-tial granularity (image-level vs. patch-level), (ii) label ag-gregation strategy (similarity vs. attention), and (iii) SSL encoder architecture. As summarized in Tab. 4, two key trends emerge. First, patch-level retrieval provides a sub-stantial performance gain over image-level baselines, likely due to its ability to handle local deformations and positional shifts common in AOI imagery. Second, similarity-based ag-gregation consistently shows better performance compared to attention-based retrieval in the MAE and DINO encoders. This suggests that for datasets with low semantic diversity, distance aggregation is sufficient for high-quality retrieval, allowing higher computational efficiency. 50 100 200 400 

> Number of Images ( N)
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> mIoU (%)
> Image Retrieval
> Patch Retrieval
> U-Net++

Figure 5. Effect of image gallery size ( N ) in retrieval performance generated through 5-fold cross-validation on the fine-tune training split. The baseline is evaluated on the fine-tune validation split. 

Retrieval Memory Scalability. Figure 5 illustrates the sensitivity of retrieval performance to memory size measured in terms of number of images. We observe that mIoU scales rapidly and near-linearly with the number of labeled images. Crucially, when the memory is expanded to 400 images (33% less data than used for full fine-tuning), patch-level retrieval exceeds the baseline ResNet18 + U-Net++, demonstrating superior data efficiency. 

## 5. Limitations 

Although our framework establishes a robust baseline for adaptive semiconductor inspection, several avenues for op-timization remain. Our approach focuses on direct SSL pre-training; however, incorporating a knowledge distilla-tion module from a larger encoder could further refine the feature representations. Additionally, while the extreme class imbalance of AOI segmentation was addressed through region-based losses, alternative formulations such as the Focal Loss [ 25 ] and class re-weighting were considered. Given the substantial overhead of hyperparameter tuning for this setting, we leave such strategies for future work. Lastly, although our evaluation demonstrates efficacy in center-cropped images, future work is required to assess scal-ing in higher resolution scenarios and meet the segmentation quality requirements of inspection models in production. 

## 6. Conclusion 

This work introduces AOI-SSL, a data-efficient framework for semiconductor AOI that overcomes data scarcity by com-bining domain-specific MAE pre-training with a patch-level retrieval mechanism. Our results demonstrate that domain pre-trained ViTs significantly outperform convolutional mod-els and generic ImageNet weights in capturing precise ge-ometric features. Furthermore, the integration of retrieval mechanisms enables near-instant adaptation to new device layouts. Ultimately, this hybrid approach provides a robust solution to the challenges of segmentation in AOI. Acknowledgments 

This work was conducted in collaboration with ASMPT ALSI B.V. within the Vision and AI Laboratory of the Cen-ter of Competency (CoC), with additional support from the MARISENS research project. The authors would like to thank the ASMPT engineering team for their technical support, do-main expertise, and for providing the datasets used in this study. 

## References 

[1] John E Ayers. Digital Integrated Circuits: Analysis and Design , page 32. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2003. 7 [2] Ivana Bala ˇzevi ´c, David Steiner, Nikhil Parthasarathy, Relja Arandjelovi ´c, and Olivier Henaff. Towards in-context scene understanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:63758–63778, 2023. 2, 3, 5 [3] Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Songhao Piao, and Furu Wei. BEiT: BERT pre-training of image transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08254 , 2021. 1 [4] Paul Bergmann, Michael Fauser, David Sattlegger, and Carsten Steger. MVTec AD–A comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 9592–9600, 2019. 2 [5] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Sub-biah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakan-tan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sand-hini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jef-frey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. 3 [6] Nian Cai, Guandong Cen, Jixiu Wu, Feiyang Li, Han Wang, and Xindu Chen. SMT solder joint inspection via a novel cascaded convolutional neural network. IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology ,8(4):670–677, 2018. 1, 3 [7] Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Herve Jegou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin. Emerg-ing properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 9630–9640, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2021. IEEE Computer Society. 2, 5, 6, 1 [8] Junlong Chen, Zijun Zhang, and Feng Wu. A data-driven method for enhancing the image-based automatic inspection of ic wire bonding defects. International Journal of Produc-tion Research , 59(16):4779–4793, 2020. 1, 2 [9] Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam. Rethinking atrous convolution for semantic image segmentation. ArXiv , abs/1706.05587, 2017. 6 [10] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Ge-offrey Hinton. A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning , pages 1597–1607. PmLR, 2020. 1 [11] Wenting Dai, Abdul Mujeeb, Marius Erdt, and Alexei Sourin. Soldering defect detection in automatic optical inspection. 

Advanced Engineering Informatics , 43:101004, 2020. 2 [12] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 248–255, 2009. 2 [13] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Syl-vain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2021. 2, 3 [14] Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff John-son, Gergely Szilvasy, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazar ´e, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Herv ´e J ´egou. The faiss library. 

IEEE Transactions on Big Data , 2025. 7 [15] Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altch ´e, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena Buchatskaya, Carl Doer-sch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Ghesh-laghi Azar, et al. Bootstrap your own latent – A new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:21271–21284, 2020. 1 [16] Jie Gui, Tuo Chen, Jing Zhang, Qiong Cao, Zhenan Sun, Hao Luo, and Dacheng Tao. A survey on self-supervised learning: Algorithms, applications, and future trends. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,46(12):9052–9071, 2024. 2 [17] Ali Hatamizadeh, Greg Heinrich, Hongxu Yin, Andrew Tao, Jose M. Alvarez, Jan Kautz, and Pavlo Molchanov. FasterViT: Fast vision transformers with hierarchical attention. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2024. 2, 3, 4 [18] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 770–778, 2016. 6 [19] Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual rep-resentation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 9729–9738, 2020. 1 [20] Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Doll ´ar, and Ross Girshick. Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 15979–15988, 2022. 1, 2, 5, 6 [21] Andrew Howard, Mark Sandler, Grace Chu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Bo Chen, Mingxing Tan, Weijun Wang, Yukun Zhu, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, et al. Searching for Mo-bileNetv3. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 1314–1324, 2019. 3 [22] Szu-Hao Huang and Ying-Cheng Pan. Automated visual in-spection in the semiconductor industry: A survey. Computers in Industry , 66:1–10, 2015. 2, 3 [23] Nils H ¨utten, Richard Meyes, and Tobias Meisen. Vision transformer in industrial visual inspection. Applied Sciences ,12(23), 2022. 3 [24] Tim Lin, Chen HJ, Po Chuan Lai, Yiyi Wang, and Anita Chiu. Optimizing semiconductor defect classification with generative ai and vision foundation models — NVIDIA Technical Blog. https://developer.nvidia.com/ blog / optimizing - semiconductor - defect -classification - with - generative - ai - and -vision - foundation - models/ , 2025. [Accessed 01-03-2026]. 2 [25] Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Doll ´ar. Focal loss for dense object detection. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pages 2980–2988, 2017. 8 [26] Huajun Liu, Xiangyu Miao, Christoph Mertz, Chengzhong Xu, and Hui Kong. CrackFormer: Transformer network for fine-grained crack detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 3783–3792, 2021. 3 [27] Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 10012–10022, 2021. 3 [28] Yilin Miao, Zhewei Liu, Xiangning Wu, and Jie Gao. Cost-sensitive siamese network for PCB defect classification. Com-putational Intelligence and Neuroscience , 2021(1), 2021. 2 [29] Fausto Milletari, Nassir Navab, and Seyed-Ahmad Ahmadi. V-net: Fully convolutional neural networks for volumetric medical image segmentation. In 2016 fourth international conference on 3D vision (3DV) , pages 565–571. Ieee, 2016. 6 [30] Mister rf. 07R01 IF amplifier/demodulator integrated circuit (motorola GM350). Wikimedia Commons, 2020. Licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. 3 [31] Maxime Oquab, Timoth ´ee Darcet, Th ´eo Moutakanni, Huy V. Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mido Assran, Nicolas Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael Rab-bat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Herve Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bo-janowski. DINOv2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. Transactions on Machine Learning Research ,2024. Featured Certification. 1, 2, 7 [32] Valentinos Pariza, Mohammadreza Salehi, Gertjan J. Burgh-outs, Francesco Locatello, and Yuki M Asano. Near, far: Patch-ordering enhances vision foundation models’ scene un-derstanding. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 2, 3 [33] Md Atiqur Rahman and Yang Wang. Optimizing intersection-over-union in deep neural networks for image segmentation. In International symposium on visual computing , pages 234– 244. Springer, 2016. 6 [34] Oriane Sim ´eoni, Huy V Vo, Maximilian Seitzer, Federico Baldassarre, Maxime Oquab, Cijo Jose, Vasil Khalidov, Marc Szafraniec, Seungeun Yi, Micha ¨el Ramamonjisoa, et al. DI-NOv3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104 , 2025. 1, 2 [35] Luk ´a ˇs Vacho, Juraj Bal ´a ˇzi, Stanislav Paulovi ˇc, and Franti ˇsek Adamovsk `y. Selected method of image analysis used in quality control of manufactured components. Tem Journal , 7 (2):281, 2018. 2 [36] Hao Wu, Wenbin Gao, and Xiangrong Xu. Solder joint recog-nition using mask R-CNN method. IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology , 10 (3):525–530, 2020. 1, 3 [37] Tete Xiao, Yingcheng Liu, Bolei Zhou, Yuning Jiang, and Jian Sun. Unified perceptual parsing for scene understanding. In 

Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 418–434, 2018. 5 [38] Enze Xie, Wenhai Wang, Zhiding Yu, Anima Anandkumar, Jose M. Alvarez, and Ping Luo. Segformer: Simple and effi-cient design for semantic segmentation with transformers. In 

Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , Red Hook, NY, USA, 2021. Curran Associates Inc. 3 [39] Yuan Zhang, Chenghan Pu, Yanming Zhang, Muyuan Niu, Lifeng Hao, and Jun Wang. Integrated circuit bonding dis-tance inspection via hierarchical measurement structure. Sen-sors , 24(12), 2024. 1, 3 [40] Jinghao Zhou, Chen Wei, Huiyu Wang, Wei Shen, Cihang Xie, Alan Yuille, and Tao Kong. Image BERT pre-training with online tokenizer. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. 1, 2, 6 [41] Zongwei Zhou, Md Mahfuzur Rahman Siddiquee, Nima Tajbakhsh, and Jianming Liang. UNet++: Redesigning skip connections to exploit multiscale features in image segmen-tation. IEEE transactions on medical imaging , 39(6):1856– 1867, 2019. 6 AOI-SSL: Self-Supervised Framework for Efficient Segmentation of Wire-bonded Semiconductors In Optical Inspection 

# Supplementary Material 

## A . Additional pre-training implementation de-tails 

DINO For the DINO implementation, we attach to our encoders a 3-layer MLP DINO projection head [ 7] with a bottleneck di-mension of 2048 and an output embedding dimension of 256. To maintain stability and prevent representation collapse, we employ a teacher EMA decay rate τ of 0.998 and a centering momentum 

λ of 0.9. The student temperature is fixed at Ts = 0 .1, while the teacher temperature Tt follows a linear warmup from 0.04 to 0.07 

during the first 30 epochs to encourage diverse feature extraction. These values are based in DINO’s original implementation [7]. An additional element of DINO is its multi-crop strategy, where crops of different sizes of the same images are used to teach scale invariance to the student encoder. Our multi-crop strategy consists of 2 global crops ( 226 × 226 crops covering an area greater than 50% of the original image) and 6 local crops ( 96 ×96 crops covering an area less than 30% of the original image), with a custom “black-patch” filtering logic that re-samples crops if more than 95% of the pixels are zero-valued, ensuring the model learns from actual structural content rather than dataset artifacts. Given that the color jittering augmentation used in DINO to distinguish teacher and student crops is not applicable to our monochrome images, we use the same augmentations described in Sec. 4.2 in both teacher and student views, with the sole difference between them being that the teacher augmentation function Vt returns only global crops, while the student function Vs returns both global and local crops (the optimal number of local crops was determined by an ablation as demonstrated in Tab. 5). Moreover, note that we did not pre-train FasterViT with DINO, as it lacks a [CLS] token, and we deemed the training signal obtained only from average pooling of the token embeddings to not be adequate. 

iBOT The iBOT training protocol extends the DINO training methodology by incorporating a Masked Image Modeling (MIM) loss applied to patch-level tokens, obtained by masking a specific ratio of input tokens to the student. The specific masking strategy used is blockwise masking [ 3 ] with a ratio of 0.3. Following the original iBOT [ 40 ], we compute this loss only on the two sets of global teachers and students’ crops produced from an input image I: {xgt 

> 1

, x gt 

> 2

} and {xgs 

> 1

, x gs 

> 2

}, respectively. In Eq. (10) we can see the specific formulation of the loss, where Ag (I) is the collection of pairs of global crops for input image I, ui is the teacher embedding of patch i of the input global crop x, ˆui is the student embedding of the input global crop ˆx, L is the number of tokens of input crops x and ˆx after being patchified, and P patch 

> θ

refers to a shared DINO head that projects the embeddings into a common K-dimensional probability space. Moreover, mi is a scalar value indicating whether patch i is masked ( mi = 1 ) or not (mi = 0 ) to ensure that unmasked tokens do not contribute to the loss. 

Ag (I) = {(x, ˆx) | x ∈ { xgt 

> 1

, x gt 

> 2

}, ˆx ∈ { xgs 

> 1

, x gs 

> 2

}} (8) 

LMIM (x, ˆx) = 

> L

X

> i=1

mi · P patch  

> θ

(ui)T log P patch  

> θ

(ˆ ui) (9) 

LiBOT (I) = LDINO (I) + 12

X 

> x, ˆx∈Ag(I)

LMIM (x, ˆx) (10) The aforementioned shared DINO head is also used to project the image level representations for the DINO loss, in alignment with the original iBOT implementation [ 40 ]. For the FasterViT-0 backbone, which lacks a native [CLS] token, the DINO loss is cal-culated on a global average pooled representation of its last feature map. To prevent early-stage divergence in FasterViT, the implemen-tation of this method utilizes a 25-epoch “warm-up” phase where the MIM loss is removed, allowing the image-level [CLS] represen-tation to stabilize through the DINO objective before introducing patch-level distillation. Both encoder architectures were trained for 3000 epochs using the AdamW optimizer with a base learning rate of 1.5 × 10 −4, a weight decay of 0.05 , and a batch size of 300 on an A100 GPU. 

MAE An additional detail regarding our MAE implementation is the protocol used to select the masking ratio. We ablate this hyperparameter to determine the best pre-training configuration in Tab. 6. The results demonstrate that high masking ratios (0.7) pro-vide the strongest self-supervised signal for the AOI dataset, while extreme ratios (0.95) lead to a significant drop in representational quality. Table 5. Impact of number of local crops on DINO pre-training, evaluated using image-level retrieval (mIoU) on a ViT-Tiny encoder pre-trained on the AOI dataset. Evaluations adopt k = 3 nearest neighbors and 50 pre-training epochs. The best result is highlighted in bold .

Number of Local Crops mIoU (%) 

1 18.1 3 24.0 

6 27.4 

9 26.4 12 25.5 

## B. Fine-tuning Hyperparameters 

Table 7 contains the hyperparameters used to fine-tune the trans-former based encoders. We fixed the β parameters of the AdamW optimizer to the values suggested in DINO [ 7 ], and the batch size to maximize GPU saturation (NVIDIA RTX 2080). The other pa-rameters were experimentally selected to maximize performance in the validation set. Table 6. Effect of masking ratio on MAE pre-training, evaluated using image-level retrieval performance (mIoU) with k = 3 nearest neighbors (best result in bold ). 

Masking Ratio mIoU (%) 

0.20 16.8 0.40 31.8 

0.70 32.3 

0.95 22.0 

Table 7. Fine-tuning hyperparameters for transformer-based encoder–decoder segmentation. 

Hyperparameter ViT-Tiny FasterViT-0 

Learning Rate  1.0 × 10 −3 5.0 × 10 −4

Layer-wise LR Decay 0.75 0.75 AdamW Weight Decay  5.0 × 10 −2 5.0 × 10 −2

Warmup Epochs 5 5AdamW  β1, β 2 0.9, 0.95 0.9, 0.95 Batch Size 64 32 

Table 8. Ablation on Loss Functions and Background Class. 

Impact of various loss formulations and the inclusion of a dedicated background class on segmentation performance. Results were generated using an MAE-pretrained ViT-Tiny encoder paired with a randomly-initialized UPerNet segmentation head. Best results per class are highlighted in bold .                                       

> Loss Function Background mIoU Epoxy Wire Wedge Ball
> Binary Cross Entropy ✗53.7 66.0 43.7 44.3 60.8
> ✓51.3 65.4 40.9 37.4 61.6
> Soft Jaccard ✗41.3 39.4 37.0 51.6 37.1
> ✓35.5 37.0 34.5 44.4 26.3
> Soft Dice ✗40.9 41.0 37.7 49.9 35.1
> ✓44.0 50.3 38.0 50.5 37.1

## C. Loss Ablations 

The results of the different losses tested are included in Tab. 8. We additionally ablate the effect of including the background class. The background-less BCE loss consistently outperforms all other losses except in the wedge class. We hypothesize that this dominance of BCE is explained by the additional complexity introduced by the multi-label DICE and Jaccard’s optimization objective, which our low-parameter encoders and limited computational budget struggle to solve efficiently. Moreover, we believe that the smaller size and finer details of wedge bonds explain the superior performance of the DICE and Jaccard losses on this class, as they focus on precise mask-prediction overlap rather than simple localization. 

## D. Retrieval Failure Modes 

While the proposed retrieval strategies achieve competitive perfor-mance without labeled parametric fine-tuning and with significantly higher throughput, they do not yet match the accuracy of the best fine-tuned fully parametric models in the generalized settings of Tab. 2. These performance gaps are particularly pronounced in the 

epoxy and wire classes. Figure 6 illustrates the primary failure modes underlying these Retrieval Decoder Original Image    

> Wire Ball Wedge Epoxy

Figure 6. Retrieval Failure Cases . Problematic cases where the patch-level retrieval strategy fails to produce high quality segmen-tation masks compared to the parametric decoders. Exactly as in Tab. 2, the retrieval strategy used is patch-level retrieval with fea-tures produced by an MAE pre-trained ViT-Tiny, while the decoder results employ an MAE pre-trained FasterViT-0 encoder attached to an UPerNet decoder. Patch Retrieval Image Retrieval Ground Truth    

> Wire Ball Wedge Epoxy

Figure 7. Visual Comparison of Retrieval Strategies. Patch-level retrieval (left) showcases superior spatial alignment and recall compared to image-level baselines (center), accurately capturing component boundaries despite layout variations. These results were generated using an MAE pre-trained ViT encoder as the retrieval backbone. limitations. As shown in the first row, a prominent issue is the lack of spatial continuity on thin, elongated structures. Unlike con-volutional decoders, which maintain better local connectivity, our Table 9. Comprehensive Method Comparison. Comparison of our fine-tuned and retrieval methods (MAE, iBOT, and DINO pre-trained) against supervised, ImageNet pre-trained baselines. AOI Dataset refers to our custom AOI pre-training dataset. The throughput was measured on an NVIDIA RTX 2080 GPU. The best results are in bold , second best are underlined.                                                                                     

> Model Pre-training Crops/s mIoU Epoxy Wire Wedge Ball
> Supervised Baselines
> MobileNetV3 + DeepLab 309.8 29.9 60.6 19.3 2.8 36.8 ResNet18 + DeepLab ImageNet 87.3 43.5 66.7 50.3 10.3 46.7 ResNet18 + U-Net++ 86.9 52.4 75.4 59.1 9.2 65.8
> Ours (Frozen LVD142M DINOv2)
> ViT-S Patch Retrieval DINOv2 90.9 47.8 43.4 48.7 45.8 53.4
> Ours (AOI Dataset)
> FasterViT-0 + UPerNet MAE 163.3 60.3 79.3 66.7 19.3 75.8
> FasterViT-0 + UPerNet iBOT 53.7 67.5 60.0 19.7 67.7 ViT-Tiny + UPerNet MAE 53.5 73.7 43.0 26.5 70.7 ViT-Tiny + UPerNet iBOT 218.1 41.6 71.8 39.3 5.9 49.5 ViT-Tiny + UPerNet DINO 40.0 68.7 31.6 1.3 54.2 ViT-T + Patch Retrieval MAE 48.1 38.4 47.8 44.4 61.8 ViT-T + Patch Retrieval iBOT 266.7 45.9 46.2 43.7 41.0 52.8 ViT-T + Patch Retrieval DINO 41.5 41.5 41.1 36.6 46.9

retrieval approach suffers from fragmentation in these regions. We attribute this to the non-overlapping patchification of the ViT-Tiny backbone: when a narrow object does not align perfectly with the patchification grid, individual patches often become dominated by background noise or adjacent classes, diluting the feature represen-tation. Adopting smaller patch sizes or overlapping patches may mitigate this discretization artifact. Furthermore, the retrieval mechanism exhibits sensitivity to low-contrast images, as demonstrated in the final two rows of Fig. 6. Since the majority of training samples share a consistent contrast profile, extreme outliers reduce the relative similarity and attention scores between the memory bank and the query images. This shift effectively invalidates the class thresholds established during train-ing, resulting in sparse or entirely empty classification masks. To enhance robustness, future work could incorporate contrast-based data augmentations during memory bank construction, ensuring that the reference distribution better accounts for such environmen-tal variations. A final notable failure mode of our retrieval strategies is their performance within the epoxy class in the generalized setting of the main method comparison. As seen in Tab. 9, although most fine-tuned models achieve robust results for this category, retrieval-based strategies exhibit performance degradation. We hypothesize that this stems from the structural characteristics of epoxy, specif-ically its relatively large size and high geometric irregularity. Ef-fectively capturing such morphological variance likely requires a significantly larger patch memory bank to achieve sufficient rep-resentational coverage of the diverse boundary contours. Conse-quently, this limitation could also benefit from the introduction of augmentations in the construction of the memory bank. 

## E. Extended Results 

Detailed results for the exhaustive suite of pre-training and adap-tation strategies are provided in Tab. 9. This includes an addi-tional MobileNetV3 [ 21 ] baseline, incorporated to benchmark the throughput–accuracy tradeoff of our proposed retrieval techniques against a faster lightweight architecture. Although MobileNetV3 achieves moderately higher throughput, its mIoU is nearly 50% lower than that of the best performing retrieval strategy, further so-lidifying the adequacy of retrieval in AOI. These expanded metrics also underscore the significant performance difference between the pre-training regimes mentioned in Sec. 4.2. Finally, our expanded qualitative results (Fig. 7) help to eluci-date the significant performance gap between image and patch-level retrieval. While image-level retrieval identifies similar device types successfully, it fails to account for sub-pixel positional shifts. In contrast, patch-level retrieval aligns predictions with local preci-sion, leading to significantly greater overlap with ground truth, particularly visible in the spatial alignment of the wires. Moreover, it also displays higher recall, as it is able to identify individual object patches at fine-grained resolutions without requiring full image-level similarity.